  1. Alcohol –  the Body   & Health   Effects A brief overview of the effects of alcohol on the body.
  2. Alcohol –   the body  & health   effects a brief overview.
  3. Alcohol -    The Body & Health Effects of Alcohol.
  4. The effects of Alcohol on the Body and Health.
  1. Alcohol Advisory Council of New Zealand (ALAC) would like to thank Dr Fiona Imlach Gunasekara, Public   Health Medicine Specialist, for preparing the summaries of the health and body effects of alcohol in this resource.
  2. ISBN  978–1–927138–41–0 (print)   978-1-927 138–42–7 (online) 5  Introduction 5
  3. What is alcohol?
  4. 6  Overall body effects 9  Blood and immune system 9  Bones and muscles 9  Brain and nervous system 10  Breasts – women 10  Eyes 10  Heart and blood pressure 11  Intestines 11  Kidneys and fluid balance
  1. This resource provides a brief overview of the health and body  effects of alcohol.
  2. It is a series of short summaries based on available evidence rather than a comprehensive literature review.
  3. Areas covered include the effects on body parts, the health effects of acute alcohol use, and the health  conditions related to chronic alcohol use.
  4. Low-risk drinking advice is also outlined in this resource along with information about where to find support and  further information.
  1. Alcohol is classed as a ‘sedative  hypnotic’ drug.
  2. It acts to depress the central nervous system at high doses.
  3. Drinking too much alcohol at one session can lead to drowsiness, respiratory depression (where breathing becomes slow, shallow or stops entirely), coma or even death.
  4. Alcohol has effects on every organ in the body, and these effects depend on the blood alcohol concentration (BAC)
  1. Alcohol affects all parts of the body including: • blood and immune system • bones and muscles • brain and nervous system • breasts (in women) • eyes • heart and blood pressure • intestines • kidneys and fluid balance • liver • lungs  • mental health • mouth and throat • pancreas and digestion of sugar • sexual and reproductive system – men and women.
  1. Chronic heavy alcohol use can damage the brain and nerves in a variety of ways.
  2. Some damage to the brain,  from mild to severe, occurs in around half of chronic  heavy alcohol drinkers.
  3. Alcohol increases the risk  of hemorrhagic stroke, where the stroke is caused by bleeding in the brain.
  1. Young and middle-aged adults, especially women, are more likely to experience harm than benefit from alcohol use.
  2. Long-term alcohol use can cause cancer of the large bowel/intestines and rectum.
  3. Alcohol can lead to malnutrition and diseases due to low vitamin levels.
  4. Alcohol is a diuretic, meaning that it causes water to be lost from the body through the kidneys (into urine)
  1. Being drunk increases the risk of pneumonia (inflammation of the lungs) At high blood concentrations, alcohol is sedating and relaxes the mouth and throat.
  2. Chronic heavy alcohol use is also associated with higher rates of pneumonia, tuberculosis and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
  3. Alcohol is addictive and can lead to dependency.
  1. Heavy alcohol use on a single occasion can lead to dangerously low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia), which can cause symptoms of shaking, sweating, dizziness, blurred vision and brain damage.
  2. Chronic heavy alcohol use can cause acute pancreatitis (sudden inflammation of and damage to the pancreas that resolves over several days)
  3. Chronic pancreatitis typically occurs in people aged 30 to 40 years and can cause abdominal pain, weight  loss, diabetes, malnutrition.
  1. Alcohol is a high-calorie beverage.
  2. One standard drink (100ml of wine, 30ml of spirits or 280ml of standard  beer) contains 290kJ, close to half the energy of a   can of fizzy drink.
  3. Chronic heavy alcohol use can also cause yellowing of the skin, decreased body hair and spider veins.
  1. A hangover can occur in anyone after a single episode of heavy alcohol use.
  2. Symptoms include headache,  nausea, vomiting, sweating, fatigue, shakiness,  sensitivity to light, and irritability.
  3. The type of alcohol drunk may increase the chance of getting a hangover.
  4. Alcohol with fewer congeners, such as gin and vodka, may cause fewer  hangover effects.
  1. For some people, alcohol is a regular or occasional drink enjoyed at social occasions.
  2. Even moderate alcohol use carries some risks, as alcohol causes breast cancer even at low doses.
  3. Alcohol can damage the developing fetus before   a woman even knows she is pregnant.
  4. When drunk regularly over time and/or drunk in a pattern of  heavy single drinking sessions, alcohol can cause a variety of  health conditions.
  1. The relationship between alcohol and cardiovascular disease is complex.
  2. Low to moderate alcohol use (one to two drinks per day) can reduce the risk of coronary artery disease and ischaemic stroke.
  3. Higher alcohol use increases the risk  of hypertension, developing  irregular heartbeats and suffering sudden death from a cardiac cause.
  4. Alcohol may also worsen other health conditions not related to alcohol.
  1. Alcohol can react with different medicines and drugs in different ways.
  2. Prescription drugs that interact with alcohol include benzodiazepines, opiates, paracetamol, antidepressants, antibiotics, antihistamines,  anti-inflammatory drugs, hypoglycaemic agents, warfarin, barbiturates and some heart medicines.
  3. Alcohol can affect unborn children and children and families.
  4. It also impacts on other people through crime, assault and sexual assault.
  1. Women have higher blood alcohol levels after drinking the same amount of alcohol as men.
  2. Women who drink alcohol are at increased risk of developing breast cancer.
  3. Men are more  likely to drink daily or several times a week, drink heavily on a single occasion and drink heavily more often.
  4. Young people up to the age of 25 years are at a higher risk of harm from alcohol use than older adults.
  5. Older people are less tolerant to the effects of alcohol.
  1. The Alcohol Advisory Council   of New Zealand’s (ALAC) alcohol  drinking advice is designed to help people make an informed choice.
  2. Low risk is not, however, no risk.
  3. A range of factors can affect  your level of risk, including drinking too quickly, your body type or genetic makeup, your gender, existing  health problems, and your age.
  1. It is possible to drink at a level that is less risky, while still having fun.
  2. Know what a standard drink is.
  3. Keep track of how much you drink – daily and weekly.
  4. Set limits for yourself and stick to them.
  5. Start with non-alcoholic drinks and   alternate with alcoholic drinks.
  6. Drink slowly.
  7. Try drinks with a lower alcohol content.
  8. Eat before or while you are drinking.
  9. Never drink and drive.
  10. Talk to your kids about alcohol.
  1. Alcohol dependency is where the body requires more alcohol to achieve the desired effect.
  2. Alcoholic hepatitis is an acute injury to the liver from chronic heavy drinking.
  3. The current limit for driving in New Zealand is 80 mg/dL. The impact of diseases, health problems, injuries, etc measured by economic cost,  mortality, morbidity, years of life lost to disability or ill health.
  1. Wernicke’s encephalopathy is an acute, severe, life-threatening disorder.
  2. Usually presents with symptoms   of abnormal or paralysed eye movements, difficulty walking and confusion caused by thiamine deficiency (secondary to chronic heavy alcohol use)
  3. It can be fatal.
  1. Alcohol and public health:   Frequently asked questions.
  2. From   http://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/faqs.htm. Alcohol.
  3. (2008).
  4. In C. Kuhn, S. Swartzwelder &  W. Wilson (Eds.), Buzzed: The straight facts about  the most used and abused drugs from alcohol to ecstasy (3rd ed., pp. 33–61).
  1. Mukamal, K. J., & Rimm, E. B. (2001).
  2. Alcohol’s  effects on the risk for coronary heart disease.
  3. Alcohol Research & Health, 25(4), 255–261.
  4. Kloner, R. A., & Rezkalla, S. H. (2007).
  5. Substance  abuse and the heart.
  6. In Textbook of cardiovascular  medicine (3rd ed.).
  7. Philadelphia: Lippincott  Williams & Wilkins.
  1. The effects of alcohol consumption on the gastrointestinal tract have been studied in the U.S. and New Zealand.
  2. A systematic review of the link between alcohol consumption and sexually transmitted diseases found no link between the two.
  3. The current study is the first of its kind to examine the relationship between alcohol and mental health.
  1. Cancer of the oesophagus.
  2. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 49(1), 108–109 68.
  3. NZ Nutrition Foundation.
  4. (2011).
  5. Energy.
  6. From http://www.nutritionfoundation.org.nz/nutrition- facts/energy.
  7. Auckland: NZ Nutrition foundation.
  8. 69. Posner, M. C., Forastiere, A. A., & Minsky, B. D. (2005).
  9. Cancers of the gastrointestinal tract.
  10. Section 1.
  11. Cancer of the Oesphagus.
  12. In V. Devita, S. Hellman & S. Rosenberg (Eds.),  Cancer, principles & practice of oncology (7th ed.).
  13. Philadelphia
  1. C. Beebe, C. Swift, R., & Davidson, D. (1998).
  2. Alcohol hangover: Mechanisms and mediators.
  3. Alcohol Health &  Research World, 22(1), 54–60.
  4. In D. Le Roith, S. I. Taylor & J. M. Olefsky (Eds.), Diabetes mellitus: A fundamental and clinical text.
  5. Philadelphia: Lippincott  Williams & Wilkins.
  1. Printed with mineral-oil-free, soy-based vegetable inks on paper from well managed forests.
  2. Please recycle.
  3. Visit alac.org.nz for more information on how to recycle your alac print.
  4. AL802 | June 2012 printed on paper that comply with environmentally sustainable practice and principles.
